battle, or attractive to the females. We see analogous cases under
nature, for instance, the tuft of hair on the breast of the turkey-cock,
which can hardly be either useful or ornamental to this bird;--indeed,
had the tuft appeared under domestication, it would have been called a
monstrosity.

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE ACTION OF NATURAL SELECTION.

In order to make it clear how, as I believe, natural selection acts, I
must beg permission to give one or two imaginary illustrations. Let us
take the case of a wolf, which preys on various animals, securing some
by craft, some by strength, and some by fleetness; and let us suppose
that the fleetest prey, a deer for instance, had from any change in
the country increased in numbers, or that other prey had decreased in
numbers, during that season of the year when the wolf is hardest pressed
for food. I can under such circumstances see no reason to doubt that the
swiftest and slimmest wolves would have the best chance of surviving,
and so be preserved or selected,--provided always that they retained
strength to master their prey at this or at some other period of the
year, when they might be compelled to prey on other animals. I can see
no more reason to doubt this, than that man can improve the fleetness
of his greyhounds by careful and methodical selection, or by that
unconscious selection which results from each man trying to keep the
best dogs without any thought of modifying the breed.

Even without any change in the proportional numbers of the animals on
which our wolf preyed, a cub might be born with an innate tendency to
pursue certain kinds of prey. Nor can this be thought very improbable;
for we often observe great differences in the natural tendencies of our
domestic animals; one cat, for instance, taking to catch rats, another
mice; one cat, according to Mr. St. John, bringing home winged game,
another hares or rabbits, and another hunting on marshy ground and
almost nightly catching woodcocks or snipes. The tendency to catch rats
rather than mice is known to be inherited. Now, if any slight innate
change of habit or of structure benefited an individual wolf, it would
have the best chance of surviving and of leaving offspring. Some of its
young would probably inherit the same habits or structure, and by the
repetition of this process, a new variety might be formed which would
either supplant or coexist with the parent-form of wolf. Or, again,
the wolves inhabiting a mountainous district, and those frequenting the
lowlands, would naturally be forced to hunt different prey; and from the
continued preservation of the individuals best fitted for the two sites,
two varieties might slowly be formed. These varieties would cross and
blend where they met; but to this subject of intercrossing we shall soon
have to return. I may add, that, according to Mr. Pierce, there are two
varieties of the wolf inhabiting the Catskill Mountains in the United
States, one with a light greyhound-like form, which pursues deer, and
the other more bulky, with shorter legs, which more frequently attacks
the shepherd's flocks.

Let us now take a more complex case. Certain plants excrete a sweet
juice, apparently for the sake of eliminating something injurious from
their sap: this is effected by glands at the base of the stipules in
some Leguminosae, and at the back of the leaf of the common laurel. This
juice, though small in quantity, is greedily sought by insects. Let us
now suppose a little sweet juice or nectar to be excreted by the inner
bases of the petals of a flower. In this case insects in seeking the
nectar would get dusted with pollen, and would certainly often transport
the pollen from one flower to the stigma of another flower. The flowers
of two distinct individuals of the same species would thus get crossed;
and the act of crossing, we have good reason to believe (as will
hereafter be more fully alluded to), would produce very vigorous
seedlings, which consequently would have the best chance of flourishing
and surviving. Some of these seedlings would probably inherit the
nectar-excreting power. Those individual flowers which had the largest
glands or nectaries, and which excreted most nectar, would be oftenest
visited by insects, and would be oftenest crossed; and so in the
long-run would gain the upper hand. Those flowers, also, which had their
stamens and pistils placed, in relation to the size and habits of the
particular insects which visited them, so as to favour in any degree
the transportal of their pollen from flower to flower, would likewise be
favoured or selected. We might have taken the case of insects visiting
flowers for the sake of collecting pollen instead of nectar; and as
pollen is formed for the sole object of fertilisation, its destruction
appears a simple loss to the plant; yet if a little pollen were carried,
at first occasionally and then habitually, by the pollen-devouring
insects from flower to flower, and a cross thus effected, although
nine-tenths of the pollen were destroyed, it might still be a great gain
to the plant; and those individuals which produced more and more pollen,
and had larger and larger anthers, would be selected.

When our plant, by this process of the continued preservation or natural
selection of more and more attractive flowers, had been rendered highly
attractive to insects, they would, unintentionally on their part,
regularly carry pollen from flower to flower; and that they can most
effectually do this, I could easily show by many striking instances.
I will give only one--not as a very striking case, but as likewise
illustrating one step in the separation of the sexes of plants,
presently to be alluded to. Some holly-trees bear only male flowers,
which have four stamens producing rather a small quantity of pollen, and
a rudimentary pistil; other holly-trees bear only female flowers; these
have a full-sized pistil, and four stamens with shrivelled anthers, in
which not a grain of pollen can be detected. Having found a female
tree exactly sixty yards from a male tree, I put the stigmas of twenty
flowers, taken from different branches, under the microscope, and
on all, without exception, there were pollen-grains, and on some a
profusion of pollen. As the wind had set for several days from the
female to the male tree, the pollen could not thus have been carried.
The weather had been cold and boisterous, and therefore not favourable
to bees, nevertheless every female flower which I examined had been
effectually fertilised by the bees, accidentally dusted with pollen,
having flown from tree to tree in search of nectar. But to return to
our imaginary case: as soon as the plant had been rendered so highly
attractive to insects that pollen was regularly carried from flower
to flower, another process might commence. No naturalist doubts the
advantage of what has been called the "physiological division of
labour;" hence we may believe that it would be advantageous to a plant
to produce stamens alone in one flower or on one whole plant, and
pistils alone in another flower or on another plant. In plants under
culture and placed under new conditions of life, sometimes the male
organs and sometimes the female organs become more or less impotent;
now if we suppose this to occur in ever so slight a degree under nature,
then as pollen is already carried regularly from flower to flower,
and as a more complete separation of the sexes of our plant would be
advantageous on the principle of the division of labour, individuals
with this tendency more and more increased, would be continually
favoured or selected, until at last a complete separation of the sexes
would be effected.

Let us now turn to the nectar-feeding insects in our imaginary case: we
may suppose the plant of which we have been slowly increasing the nectar
by continued selection, to be a common plant; and that certain insects
depended in main part on its nectar for food. I could give many facts,
showing how anxious bees are to save time; for instance, their habit of
cutting holes and sucking the nectar at the bases of certain flowers,
which they can, with a very little more trouble, enter by the mouth.
Bearing such facts in mind, I can see no reason to doubt that an
accidental deviation in the size and form of the body, or in the
curvature and length of the proboscis, etc., far too slight to be
appreciated by us, might profit a bee or other insect, so that an
individual so characterised would be able to obtain its food more
quickly, and so have a better chance of living and leaving descendants.
Its descendants would probably inherit a tendency to a similar slight
deviation of structure. The tubes of the corollas of the common red and
incarnate clovers (Trifolium pratense and incarnatum) do not on a hasty
glance appear to differ in length; yet the hive-bee can easily suck
the nectar out of the incarnate clover, but not out of the common red
clover, which is visited by humble-bees alone; so that whole fields of
the red clover offer in vain an abundant supply of precious nectar to
the hive-bee. Thus it might be a great advantage to the hive-bee to have
a slightly longer or differently constructed proboscis. On the other
hand, I have found by experiment that the fertility of clover greatly
depends on bees visiting and moving parts of the corolla, so as to push
the pollen on to the stigmatic surface. Hence, again, if humble-bees
were to become rare in any country, it might be a great advantage to the
red clover to have a shorter or more deeply divided tube to its corolla,
so that the hive-bee could visit its flowers. Thus I can understand how
a flower and a bee might slowly become, either simultaneously or one
after the other, modified and adapted in the most perfect manner to each
other, by the continued preservation of individuals presenting mutual
